added cron tutorial (#1515)
fermyon/developer: content/wasm-functions/using-cron-jobs.md

Let’s create a cron job that triggers your Spin application every 5 minutes with the `spin aka crons create` subcommand. The cron job you generate with this subcommand will be associated with the Spin application in your current working directory that you deployed to Fermyon Wasm Functions. The `spin aka crons create` subcommand takes three arguments:

* **Schedule** – How often the job runs, in standard cron syntax
* **Path and query** – The HTTP path and (optional) query parameters to invoke.   
* **Name** – A name for your cron job

> Note that you can have multiple cron jobs per Spin application as long as the combination of **schedule** and **path and query*** is unique. You might want multiple cron jobs in a single Spin application when different tasks need to run on separate schedules or require different logic. For example, you may want your Spin appliation to fetch different types of data, perform distinct maintenance routines, or sync with multiple external services independently.

In this example, we’ll schedule a job to hit the `/*` path with a msg query parameter set to "fwf" every 5 minutes, for a Spin app named hello-world.

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console

> spin aka crons create "*/5 * * * *" "/*" "cron-job-1"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
spin aka crons create "*/5 * * * *" "/" "cron-job-1"
```

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```javascript 
// For AutoRouter documentation refer to https://itty.dev/itty-router/routers/autorouter
import { AutoRouter } from 'itty-router';

// Initialize the router
let router = AutoRouter();

// Route ordering matters:
// - The first matching route is used
// - Routes can act as middleware if they don’t return a response
// - Unmatched routes return a 404
router
    .get("/cron-me", (request) => {
        // Parse the request URL to access query parameters
        const url = new URL(request.url);
        
        // Read the 'msg' query parameter, defaulting to an empty string if not provided
        const msg = url.searchParams.get("msg");

        // Capture current timestamp for logging and response
        const now = new Date().toISOString();

>         // Log the trigger event, including the value of 'msg'

Author: I decided to simplify the example and remove the functionality that changes the output depending on whether the app received a direct ping or a cron trigger. I agree that the added complexity outweighs the value it's providing.

            return new Response( {
                status: 200,
            });
        } else {
            // Return a direct ping response without logging
            return new Response(`Hello! This is a direct ping at ${now}`, {
                status: 200,
            });
        }
    });

// Attach the router to the fetch event
addEventListener('fetch', (event) => {
    event.respondWith(router.fetch(event.request));
});
```

To build and run the application locally, run the following command:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
spin build --up
```

Let's curl the application's endpoint to test if it is working as expected:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
curl localhost:3000/cron-me
```

 You should see a message returned along the lines of (_but with an accurate datetime at the time of following this tutoral_):

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
Hello! This is a direct ping at 2025-04-02T02:45:25.562Z
```

## Deploy Spin Application to Fermyon Wasm Functions

Before scheduling our cron job, we deploy our Spin application to the Fermyon Wasm Functions platform. Deploy the application with the following command:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
spin aka deploy
```

> Upon successful deployment, you should receive a domain name that you can use to test the application:

Reviewer: Consider shoiwing the deploy output so they can see where to find the domain name.

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
curl https://ec8f3c23-b73d-4d51-aa69-aabd7ddc132a.aka.fermyon.tech/cron-me
Hello! This is a direct ping at 2025-04-02T03:16:14.212Z% 
```

# Scheduling a Cron Job for Your Spin Application

Now we will use the `spin aka crons` command to invoke the Spin app's HTTP endpoint on our desired schedule. The syntax for this request follows standard crontab format.

> > `spin aka crons` supports multiple digits in each cron expression field and intervals in every position (e.g., `* */12 * * *` for every 12 hours). Syntax elements like comma-separated lists and ranges are currently supported. Scheduling follows UTC and you may need to [convert your local time to UTC](https://www.worldtimebuddy.com/?pl=1&lid=100&h=100&hf=1) to ensure correct execution during daylight savings time.

Reviewer: Won't I need to convert my local time to UTC anyway, if I want it to fire at a particular local time?  And then amend it at each DST change?

Author: Yes, that's a good point. I liked your language suggestion below -- I will make that modification.

> > `spin aka crons` supports multiple digits in each cron expression field and intervals in every position (e.g., `* */12 * * *` for every 12 hours). Syntax elements like comma-separated lists and ranges are currently supported. Scheduling follows UTC and you may need to [convert your local time to UTC](https://www.worldtimebuddy.com/?pl=1&lid=100&h=100&hf=1) to ensure correct execution during daylight savings time.

Reviewer: "Scheduling follows UTC" did not leave me 100% clear that I understood what I was being told.  I _assume_ this is saying that I must enter times of day in UTC rather than local time (i.e. the system does not convert for me).  Could we say explicitly "if your schedule includes a time of day, that time of day must be in UTC"?  (I mean assuming that _is_what it means!)

Reviewer 2: That is indeed what it means.

Let’s create a cron job that triggers your Spin application every 5 minutes. The `spin aka crons create` subcommand takes three arguments:

* **Schedule:** How often the job runs, using standard cron syntax
* **Path and query:** The HTTP path (and optional query parameters) to invoke

> * **Name:** The Spin applciaton to apply the cron job to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Name:** The Spin application to apply the cron job to
```

> * **Name:** The Spin applciaton to apply the cron job to

Reviewer: The plugin docs say that the third parameter is the name of the _cron job_ not the name of the application.

(If that's true, we need to explain which application it's going to hit - I assume the one in the current directory.)

_(ETA: see Ryan's earlier comment https://github.com/fermyon/developer/pull/1515#discussion_r2024352152)_

Author: Good catch. I've updated accordingly.

In this example, we’ll schedule a job that hits the `/cron-me` path with a `msg` query parameter of "fwf" every 5 minutes for a Spin app named hello-cron-job.

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console

> spin aka crons create "*/5 * * * *" "/cron-me?msg=fwf" "hello-cron-job"

Reviewer: Oh man that's a lot of positional parameters and people are going to find it very easy to mess up the order.  I hope we give good error messages if they do.

```

You should see output similar to:

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
Created cron which will next run at 2025-04-02 04:00:00 UTC
```

> If we wait 5 minutes and check our application logs with the `spin aka logs` subcommand, we will see that our cron job invoked the application at the top of the hour as expected. 

Reviewer: "top of the hour" vs "every 5 minutes"

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
spin aka logs -a hello-cron-job

> 2025-04-02 04:00:00 [hello-cron-job]  Hello, cron job triggered with msg: "fwf" at 2025-04-12T04:00:00Z

Reviewer: Consider linking this back to the `console.log` statement from from the HTTP application, and maybe put some more motivation around this, both here and when you write the application.  E.g. motivating the application a la "For a real cron job, you'd see its effects in the data it updates or the artifacts it produces. For this tutorial, though, we'll just emit a log, so that we can see the application has been called." and then down here we can say "This is the message we had the application log so that we could see it was being called" or something like that.

(If you keep the "different behaviour when they try it interactively" thing then it would be good to be _extra_ clear about this because the message will be unfamiliar.)

Author: Great suggestion! I added a disclaimer above the source code snippet that this is a simplified example and allude to what operations you may see in a real world example.

# Prerequisites
Before proceeding, ensure you have the following:

- Spin and the `spin aka` plugin installed on your machine ([Installation Guide](./quickstart.md))
- Access to Fermyon Wasm Functions preview ([Sign Up Form](https://fibsu0jcu2g.typeform.com/fwf-preview))

# Introduction to Cron Jobs

## What Are Cron Jobs?

Cron jobs are scheduled tasks that run at specified intervals. They are commonly used for automating repetitive tasks such as data processing, report generation, and background maintenance. Other potential use cases include: 

* Automated data backups
* Periodic API polling
* Log file rotation
* Scheduled notifications

# Create a Spin Application 

You must have a Spin application deployed to Fermyon Wasm Functions to associate a cron job. We'll create a new Spin application using the `http-js` template, which we will then invoke on a schedule using a cron job in later steps:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
$ spin new -t http-js --accept-defaults hello-cron-job

$ cd hello-cron-job

$ npm install
```

We'll go ahead add a path that will be used our cron job in later steps:

> ```toml

Reviewer: Do we need to add a second trigger?  Is this trying to illustrate a recommended practice?  It would be good to say more about the motivation because right now this feels like a step I follow without knowing why.

Author: I went back and forth on this... I decided to not add a second trigger to keep the example simple. Perhaps I can write a more realistic example for Spin Hub that we can link as a resource at the end of the tutorial for those interested in that scenario. 

To simplify things, I've removed the specific path and replaced it with wildcard.

[[trigger.http]]
route = "/cron-me"
component = "hello-cron-job"
```

> > Note that you can have multiple cron jobs per Spin application as long as the combination of schedule and path_and_query is unique. We will review how to set those values later in the tutorial.  

Reviewer: This seems a bit disconnected from "add a trigger."  It feels like you're setting up for a mental model of "multiple cron jobs per app, each cron job handled by a different component, those components on different triggers, cron jobs mapped to components via their routes" but it's not explicit, and the "each trigger points at the same component as the everything route and we route within the component" doesn't draw out that structure.

Perhaps move this down to where you talk about creating cron jobs, and if you want to talk about how to structure a multi-job app then do so there?  And focus on the simple "get something working" path here?  Or do you feel that leads readers to a dead end?

Author: Agreed - I've moved it down to the section where I talk about the required parameters for the `spin aka crons create` subcommand. I decided to not expand into multi-job to keep the tutorial manageable, but I like the idea of creating a more complex example for Spin Hub or fwf-examples we can link to in this tutorial for those wanting a more realistic example.

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
curl https://1064f8cc-4b83-4fb0-a550-ff51d8a85a18.aka.fermyon.tech/cron-me
```

You should receive the same message as you did during local testing:

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
Cron job executed
```

# Scheduling a Cron Job for Your Spin Application

Now we’ll use the `spin aka crons` command to invoke the Spin application's HTTP endpoint on a scheduled basis. The schedule uses standard crontab syntax.

> `spin aka crons` supports multiple digits in each cron field, as well as intervals in any position (e.g., `* */12 * * *` to run every 12 hours). You can also use comma-separated lists and ranges. If your schedule includes a specific time of day, be sure to use UTC—you may need to [convert your local time to UTC](https://www.worldtimebuddy.com/?pl=1&lid=100&h=100&hf=1) to ensure correct execution.

Let’s create a cron job that triggers your Spin application every 5 minutes. The `spin aka crons` create subcommand takes three arguments:

* **Schedule** – How often the job runs, in standard cron syntax
* **Path and query** – The HTTP path (and optional query parameters) to invoke

> * **Name** – A name for your cron job (this will be associated with the Spin application in your current working directory)

Reviewer: Consider breaking this up - "it applies to the app in your current directory" is important enough that it shouldn't be a parenthesis under "the name for the job".  E.g.

```suggestion
* **Name** – A name for your cron job

The cron job will always invoke the Spin application in your current working directory.
```

(or perhaps "...will always invoke the Spin application deployed from your current..." which avoids any implication that it will invoke it _in_ your cwd, but is perhaps awkward and requires extra effort for the reader to parse, not sure)

Author: Good point about highlighting this. I removed it from parenthesis and put it at the beginning of the paragraph for this section.

In this example, we’ll schedule a job to hit the `/cron-me` path with a msg query parameter set to "fwf" every 5 minutes, for a Spin app named hello-cron-job.

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
spin aka crons create "*/5 * * * *" "/cron-me?msg=fwf" "cron-job-1"
```

You should see output similar to:

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
Created cron which will next run at 2025-04-02 04:00:00 UTC
```

If we wait 5 minutes and check our application logs with the `spin aka logs` subcommand, we will see that our cron job invoked the application every five minutes as expected. 

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
spin aka logs -a hello-cron-job
2025-04-02 04:00:00 [hello-cron-job]  Cron job triggered at 2025-04-12T04:00:00Z with msg: "fwf" 
```

# Managing Cron Jobs

You can view all of your running cron jobs with:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console
spin aka crons list
```

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console
+----------------+--------------+-------------------------+
| Name           | Schedule     | Next Run                |
+=========================================================+

> | hello-cron-job |  */5 * * * * | 2025-04-02 04:00:00 UTC |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| cron-job-1 |  */5 * * * * | 2025-04-02 04:00:00 UTC |
```

or wait, are you saying this is the app name rather than the job name?

(I am not sure if the command shows _all_ cron jobs or only the ones associated with the current app.)

Author: d'oh - typo! I fixed this. I also renamed the app to "hello-world" to avoid confusion between app name and cron job name.  

> I am not sure if the command shows all cron jobs or only the ones associated with the current app.)
@rylev any guidance on this? I'm not sure

Reviewer: Having thoroughly distinct different names for the app and the cron job is an excellent idea - thank you!

+----------------+--------------+-------------------------+
```

# Delete Cron Job

To delete a cron job, use:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```console

> spin aka crons delete hello-cron-job

Reviewer: ```suggestion
spin aka crons delete cron-job-1
```

```

<!-- @nocpy -->

```console

> Deleted cron job 'hello-cron-job' with schedule '*/5 * * * *'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deleted cron job 'cron-job-1' with schedule '*/5 * * * *'
```
